Preparing Doubly Contained Samples for XAS Measurement
======================================================

At the APS (and presumably at other synchrotrons) certain kinds of
hazardous samples require double containment. A common example would be
something containing an actinide or radionuclide. My group, for example,
occasionally measures sediment samples with uranium contamination. The
APS requires double containment -- i.e. two physical barriers
constraining the sample from leaking out of its sample holder.


There is no single way of preparing samples in this manner, but anything
you come up with will be a variation on what I describe here. The
technique shown below is the one used by my group. It meets the
requirements of the health physics staff at the APS and it makes a good
sample for the XAS measurement. When prepared in a glove box, this
technique will also protect an oxygen sensitive sample from atmospheric
oxygen for many hours.


This picture shows the supplies we will use to prepare our sample. There
are three pieces of kapton, two small ones which will be used with the
sample holder itself and one large one which will be used to make a
baggie. There is a polycarbonate sample frame. This is simply a 50mm x
20mm x 3 mm piece of polycarbonate with a 6mm tall slot milled out.
There is nothing special about this frame -- any similar object can be
used. For instance, a washer makes a fine sample holder. Finally we have
a roll of kapton tape, a few tools, and our sample (which is shown here
in a weighing boat). Yes, the sample in this demo is some ground coffee.
Apparently, we will be measuring the Cf edge ;-)

.. _fig-DCS1:
.. figure:: https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/DoublyContaiedSamples/supplies.jpg
   :align: center



Step 0: Preparing your sample
-----------------------------

This tutorial does not attempt to explain how to prepare your actual
sample for XAS measurement. The point of this tutorial is explain how to
package your hazardous sample in a way suitable for safe and effective
measurement. You must, of course, take all appropriate care to make the
sample itself suitable for measurement. That includes making your sample
not too thin and not too thick as well as homogeneous and free of pin
holes.

Here are some links to useful sample preparation tutorials written by
various XAS practitioners. These are all PDF files:

-  `Grant Bunker <http://gbxafs.iit.edu/training/XAFS_sample_prep.pdf>`__
-  `Matt Newville <http://xafs.org/Tutorials?action=AttachFile&do=get&target=Newville_Expt.pdf>`__
-  `Rob Scarrow <http://xafs.org/Workshops/NSLS2002?action=AttachFile&do=get&target=Scarrow.pdf>`__
-  `Scott Calvin <http://xafs.org/Workshops/NSLS2003?action=AttachFile&do=get&target=Calvin.pdf>`__

It is wise to spend a bit of extra effort in making a good sample. Beam
time is precious. You do not want to squander it with a poorly made
sample.

Step 1: Preparing the kapton tape
---------------------------------

Here I have cut two lengths of kapton tape. They are held down to the
surface with two more pieces of tape. The sticky side is facing up. The
two small piece of kapton film were cut to a size slightly larger than
the hole in the polycarbonate frame. I have one small piece of film in
the center of each piece of kapton tape. The purpose of the small piece
of kapton film is to protect the sample from the adhesive on the tape.
Some samples may be reactive when exposed to the organic and sulfur
compounds in the adhesive.

.. _fig-DCS2:
.. figure:: https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/DoublyContaiedSamples/tape_film.jpg
   :align: center



Step 2: Cover one side of the sample frame
------------------------------------------

Lift one piece of kapton tape and apply it to the sample frame such that
the small piece of kapton film completely covers the slot but is
centered on the frame. It is very important that adhesive from the tape
touches the sample frame on all sides of the small piece of film. Thus
this piece of film must be bigger than the slot, but smaller than the
width of the frame.

.. _fig-DCS3:
.. figure:: https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/DoublyContaiedSamples/firstside.jpg
   :align: center


Flip the sample frame over. We now have a well in which to load our
sample.

.. _fig-DCS4:
.. figure:: https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/DoublyContaiedSamples/firstside_flipped.jpg
   :align: center

Step 3: Load the sample
-----------------------

Using a spatula, spoon some material into the sample well.

.. _fig-DCS5:
.. figure:: https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/DoublyContaiedSamples/load.jpg
   :align: center


Clean any stray bits off the surrounding frame. This is an important
step -- you do not want flecks of your sample interfering with the
adhesive.

.. _fig-DCS6:
.. figure:: https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/DoublyContaiedSamples/clean.jpg
   :align: center



Step 4: Finishing off the sample holder
---------------------------------------

Use the second piece of kapton tape with a small piece of kapton film to
cover the second side of the sample. Again, take care to center the
small piece of film over the sample such that the adhesive of the tape
touches the sample frame on all sides of the small piece of film.

.. _fig-DCS7:
.. figure:: https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/DoublyContaiedSamples/bothsides.jpg
   :align: center


With scissors, trim the excess tape. Tah dah! It's a sample. If your
sample is anaerobic and you have performed all steps up to this point in
a glove box, the sample will be protected against atmospheric oxygen for
several hours. The kapton is essentially impermeable to oxygen. The only
path for oxygen to enter the sample is through the adhesive of the tape.
So long as you have applied the adhesive smoothly to the sample frame,
the diffusion path for the oxygen will be very long and slow.

.. _fig-DCS8:
.. figure:: https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/DoublyContaiedSamples/bothsides_trimmed.jpg
   :align: center


Step 5: Preparing the secondary containment.
--------------------------------------------

APS rules require two independent forms of sample containment. For our
second form of containment, we will make a small bag out of the large
piece of kapton and some kapton tape. While there are many conceivable
ways of providing secondary containment (a ziplock bag comes to mind)
this is the only method approved by the APS. This is a matter of the
health physics staff having standard operating procedures (SOP) that
they are obliged to follow. At the APS, the SOP for secondary
containment of an XAS sample stipulates making a kapton baggie in the
manner described here. Both the film and the tape must be kapton --
other kinds of film and other tapes are not consistent with the SOP.

Here is a blurry picture of the prepared sample frame and the large
piece of kapton.

.. _fig-DCS9:
.. figure:: https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/DoublyContaiedSamples/begin_bag.jpg
   :align: center


Fold the large piece of kapton film in half and seal the sides with
kapton tape.

.. _fig-DCS10:
.. figure:: https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/DoublyContaiedSamples/bag_prep.jpg
   :align: center


Finish sealing the sides of the bag and slip the sample inside.

.. _fig-DCS11:
.. figure:: https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/DoublyContaiedSamples/bag.jpg
   :align: center


Step 6: Finishing the secondary containment
-------------------------------------------

Trim the excess material from the top of the bag.

.. _fig-DCS12:
.. figure:: https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/DoublyContaiedSamples/bag_trimmed.jpg
   :align: center


Using more kapton tape, seal the bag. Trim away any excess material. It
is a good idea to leave the tape a bit longer than the bag it is
sealing. That way, you can be sure there are no small holes in the
corners of the bag through which something might leak.

.. _fig-DCS13:
.. figure:: https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/DoublyContaiedSamples/finished.jpg
   :align: center


Further considerations
----------------------

#. Each sample must have its own baggie. Never put multiple samples in a
   baggie.

#. Remember that the XAS measurement will be made *through* the
   baggie. For lower energy edges, you should consider using the thinnest
   available film and tape.

#. For anoxic samples, it is a good idea to perform all steps inside of
   a glove box.

#. To maintain a safe environment for an anoxic sample during
   transport, slip the entire baggie into a Falcon tube while still in
   the glove box.  For the highly paranoid or if you expect that the
   sample will spend extensive time outside of a glove box, the Falcon
   tub can be placed inside of a Mason jar while still in the glove
   box.
   
#. At some facilities, kapton is the only acknowledged material
   for preparing these samples.  In particular, polyethylene bags with
   zip-lock tops may not be used as a form of containment.

