
How to replace a broken mylar window on a Lytle Chamber
-------------------------------------------------------

(Who is the original author of this piece?  Presumably the person in
`Fig 6b <#fig6b>`__... It would be nice to give credit...)


Step 1. Taking the plate apart from the detector
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Note: This is definitely the most challenging step.

First, Take off all the mounting hardware and Soller slits. Remove the
electronics as well (whether you need to put them back on is up to you
-- many of us don't use these anyway, and send the signals straight to a
commercial current amplifier like the SRS 570. Remove all the nuts,
electric connectors and gas connectors.

The back plate (where the electronics attach) is usually sealed to the
chamber with a blue silicone material (RTV). Soak this in acetone for 24
hours, then pry it apart with a knife. The silicone is a real mess, and
depending on the chamber, you might need to hammer it apart. We prefer
to reassemble with Devcon 2 ton epoxy (`Fig 1 <#fig1>`__), which is
strong, can make an air seal, and dissolves more easily in acetone.


.. _fig1:
.. figure:: https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_093.jpg
   :align: center

   **Fig 1**. Devcon 2 ton epoxy. Don't leave home without it.

You'll also need to get the front mylar window off. The mylar is
attached to an aluminum ring and separated from the outside box by a
teflon spacer. Again, use acetone to loosen the epoxy. Pull out the
assembly of collecting plates (`Fig 2 <#fig2>`__). The one shown has two
Ni mesh grids for the middle plate (high voltage) and the back
collecting plate. In our experience, these Ni mesh windows are pretty
fragile and easily broken, but can be replaced with aluminized mylar
using the same procedure described in the next section.

Just to be clear, each of the three plates (one HV in the middle and two
collecting plates in front and back) consists of two aluminum rings with
a Ni mesh or aluminized mylar window between them. The rings are screwed
together to hold the window. The screw heads always point toward the
back of the detector. The rings are spaced apart by teflon holders that
are slotted to hold the middle and back plate, and this whole assembly
rests against the front plate.


.. subfigstart::
   
.. _fig2a:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_092.jpg
   :width: 90%


.. _fig2b:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_089.jpg
   :width: 90%


.. subfigend::
   :width: 0.45
   :label: _fig2

   **Fig 2**. Collecting plates from Lytle Chamber with Ni mesh. The image on the
   right shows the middle (HV) and back plate still attached to the
   teflon spacers.
   In the back are the two rings for the front collecting plate (the
   front mylar window, having been punctured, was removed).


When your done, you'll have a clean ion chamber and clean rings. See
`Fig 2 <#fig2>`__ and `Fig 3 <#fig3>`__.


.. subfigstart::
   
.. _fig3a:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_091.jpg
   :width: 90%


.. _fig3b:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_090.jpg
   :width: 90%


.. subfigend::
   :width: 0.45
   :label: _fig2

   **Fig 3.** Top: Clean Ion Chamber and back plate.
   Bottom: Inside of a clean chamber, with teflon insulating ring.

Step 2. Stretching the aluminized mylar
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you can get it, double-sided aluminized mylar is preferred, as both
sides will conduct If you cannot get it, mylar coated on only one side
is OK, but you may want to use silver print or conducting paint to make
electrical contact. Make sure you know which side is conducting with a
multi-meter.

The goal here is to stretch out a piece of mylar and glue it to the
aluminum ring. See `Fig 4 <#fig4>`__.

1. Clean the surface of the table. The surface should be smooth.

2. Cut a piece of the aluminized mylar bigger than the ring and put it
on the table '''with a conducting surface down'''.

3. Use scotch tape on one corner of the mylar and stick it on the table.
Then stretch it in a clockwise direction and put another piece of scotch
tape. Go on stretching about 1-1.5 cm and put scotch tape on the
stretched part. Do this till the whole mylar is stretched out pretty
nicely and looks taut. This is a very important step since presence of
wrinkles will give rise to noise.

.. subfigstart::
   
.. _fig4a:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_095.jpg
   :width: 90%


.. _fig4b:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_096.jpg
   :width: 90%

.. _fig4c:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_098.jpg
   :width: 90%

.. _fig4d:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_101.jpg
   :width: 90%


.. subfigend::
   :width: 0.45
   :label: _fig4

   **Fig 4.**  strecthing mylar.

Step 3. Epoxy the Ring to Mylar
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Clean the mylar window, mix a small amount of epoxy and completely cover
the **threaded** aluminum ring with a thin coat of epoxy. Place the
ring on the mylar and put a block (say, the chamber itself) on top of
the ring to press it down. It's often helpful to add a piece of paper
between the ring and the weight, so that the weight does not become
epoxied to the ring. Wait a good solid 24 hours for the epoxy to dry.
For the repair pictured here, we didn't wait long enough, and the mylar
window did not end up very tight.


.. subfigstart::
   
.. _fig5a:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_102.jpg
   :width: 90%


.. _fig5b:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_105.jpg
   :width: 90%

.. _fig5c:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_107.jpg
   :width: 90%

.. _fig5d:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_109.jpg
   :width: 90%


.. subfigend::
   :width: 0.45
   :label: _fig5

   **Fig 5.**  gluing the ring to the mylar.

Step 4. Screw the two halves of the front ring together
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once the epoxy is dry, take off the weight and cut away to excess mylar
to leave a tightly stretched mylar window. The screw holes will have
some epoxy in them. To clear them out, place the ring with the mylar
over the non-threaded ring, and poke a sharp needle through the hole. Be
careful not to puncture the window (sending you back to Step 2!).
Holding a piece of cardboard over the window seems to work -- and yes, I
have poked a hole in the window at this stage!

Once the holes are through, screw the two rings of the front plate
together. Again, I use the cardboard to prevent the screwdriver from
puncturing the window. Check the conductivity on both sides of the
plate. Ideally, the window conducts on both sides. It should definitely
conduct on the **inside** of the chamber (the side of the ring with
the screw heads). Using a small amount of silver paint along the inside
of the ring can improve the connectivity.


.. subfigstart::
   
.. _fig6a:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_112.jpg
   :width: 90%


.. _fig6b:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_113.jpg
   :width: 90%

.. _fig6c:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_115.jpg
   :width: 90%

.. _fig6d:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_116.jpg
   :width: 90%


.. subfigend::
   :width: 0.45
   :label: _fig6

   **Fig 6.**  The mylar window, clearing the epoxied
   holes to screw the front ring back together.

Step 5: Re-assemble the stack of conducting rings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

First, using a small amount of epoxy, glue the teflon ring at the bottom
of the chamber. This teflon ring insulates the front conducting plate
from the box (which is at ground). The epoxy keeps the ring from
slipping around and also helps to seal in gases. Next place the front
ring in place, and the put the assembly with the middle and back ring
on.


.. subfigstart::
   
.. _fig7a:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_123.jpg
   :width: 90%


.. _fig7b:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_128.jpg
   :width: 90%

.. _fig7c:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_130.jpg
   :width: 90%

.. subfigend::
   :width: 0.45
   :label: _fig7

   **Fig 7.**  Glue the teflon ring to the bottom (inside
   front) of the chamber, put the collecting rings in place.

Step 6: Re-attache the BNC connectors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reattach the BNC connectors and test that they each make electrical
contact with the corresponding ring. Checking the front and back plate
are straightforward. The middle plate can be checked using the holes for
the gas inlet/outlet on the side of the chamber opposite the BNC
connectors. Based on my own experience, I strongly advise you to check
the connections before you epoxy the chamber together!


.. subfigstart::
   
.. _fig8a:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_120.jpg
   :width: 90%


.. _fig8b:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_122.jpg
   :width: 90%

.. subfigend::
   :width: 0.45
   :label: _fig8

   **Fig 8.**  Check the electrical contacts.

Step 7. Final assembly
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Glue the back plate on, and screw it together using the 4 screws
provided, again using Devcon 2-ton epoxy (see `Fig 1 <#fig1>`__), not
that nasty blue RTV stuff.

Optionally (but a good idea, especially since you've just replaced a
broken window, is to glue a piece of thin sheet of kapton to the front
of the chamber. This will help protect the mylar window and give a
better seal for inert gases.


.. subfigstart::
   
.. _fig9a:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_132.jpg
   :width: 90%


.. _fig9b:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_136.jpg
   :width: 90%

.. _fig9c:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_137.jpg
   :width: 90%

.. _fig9d:
.. figure::  https://docs.xrayabsorption.org/Experiment/LytleChamberRepair/LC_143.jpg
   :width: 90%


.. subfigend::
   :width: 0.45
   :label: _fig9

   **Fig 9.**  More epoxy!!! And, finally, a sealed Lytle
   chamber.

Finally, if desired, re-attach the electronics box.
